Analysis of Red Dots project REM observations of 3 M-dwarf
objects
John M. Collins
University of Hertfordshire,
College Lane, Hatfield, Herts,
AL10 9AB, UK
j.m.collins@herts.ac.uk
11th March 2023

Abstract
This report is submitted to the University of Hertfordshire with a view to progression to the final stage of
completing the author’s PhD. The project is to devise methods for considering the automatic REM observations
taken by the Red Dots Project of three M-dwarf objects, specifically Proxima Centauri, Barnard’s Star and
Ross 154. Initially, particular attention was paid to to Ross 154.
This report details the work done to date and the intended future directions to be taken to complete the project.
A draft paper relating to Ross 154 is provided with this report which is intended to be read together with it.

1

Introduction

This report describes steps taken to analyse observational data from the REM (Rapid Eye Mount) telescope and
camera equipment in La Silla, Chile, as operated by the Red Dots Project. This work commenced in March 2015.
(The Red Dots Project, 2020). However the data collection for the project did not start until mid-July 2017.
The REM telescope has been set up to take a series of automatic observations of patches of sky on a nearly
nightly basis. The main concern of the Red Dots Project is of M-dwarf stars and as the REM observatory is
concurrently used for other projects, for example Giannini et al. (2018), this report focuses on the M-dwarf targets
designated by the Red Dots Project, which started in mid-2017. All observations ceased on March 2020 due to
the Coronavirus pandemic but were restarted in October 2020 and continued up until April 2022.
The original objectives of the work documented in this report are:
1. To set up a pipeline for automatic analysis and processing of the data.
2. To evaluate to what degree reliable photometry, together with an estimate of the error bars, can be obtained
in relation to the targets of interest.
3. If accuracy and reliability of the photometry permit, obtain periodic data for the target stars of particular
interest.
Other supplementary objectives came to light over the course of the work. An early example of this was
obtaining a rotation period for Ross 154. As noted in Section 1.2, there is a little lack of clarity and some
contradictions in the published rotation period, so I undertook some work to establish the rotation period of
Ross 154 from existing data sources and then attempt to recover the same period from the REM data.

1.1

The REM telescope

The REM observatory at La Silla was initially set up in 2003 (Antonelli, 2005) consisting of the the REMIR
near-infrared camera and the visible light camera, ROSS, which was upgraded in 2015 to the ROSS2 camera.
Light to the REMIR telescope is split between 3 filters, H, J and K with one of seven of dither patterns. Images
are returned as 512x512 arrays with reduction already carried out using PREPROCESS software (di Paola, 2001),
as described in Calzoletti et al. (2005). The REMIR observations were discontinued at the beginning of June 2019
due to a system fault. They were restarted at the beginning of February 2021.
The visible light portion of the light from the telescope is split between 4 Sloan-style filters and projected
onto quadrants of a 2048x2048 CCD array, which is an ANDOR Ikon-L series chip. The names, quadrants and
bandwidths of the 4 filters are set out in Table 1.
The images from the visible light telescope are nominally 1024 by 1924 pixels, although the effective area
is only in the region of 900 by 900 pixels varying for each filter as the settings are periodically adjusted. As a
1

Filter
g’
r’
i’
z’

Quadrant
Upper Right
Lower Right
Upper Left
Lower Left

Low bw (nm)
400
550
700
820

High bw (nm)
550
700
820
1000

Table 1: The four ROSS2 filters, quadrant used on the CCD chip, low and high bandwidth in nm. Hereinafter the
filters are referred to as g, r, i and z respectively and the quadrants as UR, LR, UL and LL.
consequence of the construction of the ROSS2 camera, all of the visible light images are taken at exactly the same
time with exactly the same exposure, viewing exactly the same patch of sky. In Fig. 1 is shown the areas on the
CCD used by various filters at various times.

Figure 1: This figure sets out the areas of the CCD used by the ROSS2 telescope which are used for the various
filters at various times after adjustment of the telescope. The area shaded in red is that prior to July 2015, the
yellow shaded area is between then and March 2019 and the blue part after then. The bulk of the area is common
to all of the configurations as can be seen. Note that all of the M-dwarf observations, with which this report is
concerned, start in 2017, well after the first reconfiguration.
Bias frames are taken daily for the visible light filters, usually 5 at approximately 11:30 am and flat field frames
nearly as often, usually 3 at a time as the sky fades. A monthly master flat and bias file for each visible light filter
is also constructed from the daily flat and bias frames.

1.2

Targets

The three main targets of the Red Dots REM observations are Proxima Centauri, Barnard’s Star and Ross 154, all
M-dwarfs.
Proxima Centauri is of spectral type M5.5 and at 1.30197 pc. is the nearest known stellar object to the solar
system. It is noted as having a significant flare activity, calculated at 1.49 events per day in Vida et al. (2019)
despite having a slow rotation period, calculated at at 82.6 ± 0.1 days in Collins et al. (2017).
Barnard’s Star is of spectral type M4 and at 1.8282 pc, is the fourth closest stellar object to the solar system after
Proxima Centauri and Alpha Centauri A and B. Its rotation period has been progressively given as 130 days
in Benedict et al. (1998), 148.6 days in Suárez Mascareño et al. (2015) and 145 ± 15 days in Toledo-Padrón
et al. (2018). Activity is low, as noted in the latter.

2

Ross 154 is of spectral type M3.5 and at 2.976 pc, is the eleventh nearest known stellar object to the solar system.
Its strong activity is noted in Wargelin et al. (2008). As discussed in the draft paper included herewith,
there is a wide variation in some of the parameters for Ross 154, in particular the value of v sin i, the radius
and the rotation period. It became clear that an early benchmark of the work on the REM data would be
clarification of the rotation period.

1.3

Number of observations

The number of observations for each of the targets (and other objects used in other projects) is given in Table 2.
In Fig. 2 is shown the distribution of observations of these targets by date.
Target
Proxima Centauri
Barnard’s Star
Ross 154
Others
Total

Number of obs
36,312
8,785
23,236
143,329
211,662

%
17.16
4.15
10.98
67.72

Table 2: This table shows the number of observations taken of each target object, also showing the number of
observations of other objects taken by other projects. The number of usable observations of each target object is
roughly 94% for the g filter and r filter cases, but significantly more for the i filter and z filter cases.

1.4

Rotation periods and activity

The rotation period of each of the targets represents a most obvious first objective of this study. As discussed in
the draft paper, it is clear that any surface features of the star, light or dark, cause a periodic signal to be observed
corresponding to the rotation period.
Rotation periods can give an indication of the age of the star, as discussed, for example in the case of Ross 154,
in Wargelin et al. (2008). It has also been noticed that a fast rotation period is correlated with strong activity. In
Mohanty & Basri (2003) it is seen how activity increases, up to a limit, with a fast rotation period. There have been
various other studies, for example Aizawa et al. (2022) and Magaudda et al. (2022) are recent papers in which
rotation periods and activity cycles are studied.
For this reason I decided to use detection of the rotation period as a benchmark for analysis of the REM data.
The rotation period of Ross 154 was somewhat unclear in the literature and I made an effort to extract it from
the data the other literature referred to and then from the REM data. Various figures for the rotation period of
Barnard’s Star exist and this is a clear target for further study, however it should be noted that there are rather less
observations of Barnard’s Star, as noted in Section 1.3. Hopefully it may be possible to obtain information about
activity cycles and add to the correlation of this with the rotation period.

1.5

Proper Motions and caveats

As all the target objects are amongst the closest objects outside the solar system, they all have particularly large
proper motions. Care must be taken to track the proper motions of the targets and any adjacent objects.
The resolution of the ROSS2 camera is such that successive pixels are approximately 0.6 arc-seconds apart
(about 4.9 for Declination values, 6.9 for Right Ascension values but that varies a little with declination). This
means that proper motions of less than 20 milliarcseconds per year may be safely disregarded which eliminates
all but a handful of objects1 in the vicinity of the targets from a need to track proper motions for the bulk of other
objects.
In Fig. 3, Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 are illustrated the proper motions Proxima Centauri, Barnard’s Star and Ross 154
respectively against the immediate backgrounds.

1 18 objects altogether, 10 in the vicinity of Proxima Centauri, 1 in the vicinity of Barnard’s Star and 7 in the vicinity of Ross 154.

3

Figure 2: This figure shows the distribution of observations of the three M-dwarf targets to date, with Proxima Centauri observations in the top pane, Barnard’s Star in the middle pane and Ross 154 in the bottom pane.

4

Figure 3: This figure tracks the proper motion of Proxima Centauri against the immediate background stars, showing start and end dates of the observations at the time of writing, the gaps showing the periods where observations
were not taken. The relative sizes of the objects, including Proxima Centauri, are based on the selected apertures
determined from subsequent processing.

Figure 4: This figure tracks the proper motion of Barnard’s Star against the immediate background stars, showing
start and end dates of the observations at the time of writing, the gaps showing the periods where observations
were not taken. The proper motion of Barnard’s Star is extremely large and the scale is not the same as in Fig. 3
or Fig. 5 in consequence. Proper motion on Declination is so large that the scale is reduced by a factor of 10 from
that in Right Ascension. Again relative sizes of the objects reflect those of the objects in the images, including
Barnard’s Star.

5

Figure 5: This figure tracks the proper motion of Ross 154 against the immediate background stars, showing start
and end dates of the observations at the time of writing, the gaps showing the periods where observations were not
taken. The scale is the same as in Fig. 3 (but not the same as in Fig. 4). Again relative sizes of the objects reflect
those of the objects in the images.

6

2

Data provided by REM observations

2.1

Data Available

Consideration of the data available from the Red Dots project site is hereinafter restricted to the targets of the
project, the M-dwarf stars, Proxima Centauri, Barnard’s Star and Ross 154. The relevant data available is.
• Images taken with visible light filters g, i, r and z taken almost daily. although not necessarily of the REM
M-dwarf targets, especially during April through to the first part of July each year when the position of the
Sun in the sky makes observations impossible. All the images of the REM M-dwarf targets are taken at a
gain of 1 and the other targets with a gain of 4.4.
• Sky flat file images taken almost every day, usually as 3 images from the sky, taken as the light fades. A set
is taken with a gain of 4.4 and with a gain of 1 each time, even if no observations are taken with that gain.
• Bias file images taken each day approximately 8 hours after the observations.
• There are a very small number of dark file images (as for bias but with an exposure of other than zero) taken
in 2015, but these were from two years before before the M-dwarf observations were commenced and are
disregarded herein.
• Monthly master flat file images for each month constructed from some of the daily flat files for the month
in question.
• Monthly master bias file images for each month, constructed from some of the daily bias files for the month
in question.
• REMIR infrared images taken almost every day up to June 2019 and then resumed in February 2021. These
are already reduced with the PREPROCESS software (di Paola, 2001).
• IDL routines used to prepare the master bias and flat files.
The flat and bias images are only available for the visible light filters g, i, r and z as the REMIR images have
already been processed. Except in a small handful of cases dating back to 2015, two years before the M-dwarf
observations started, these and the observation files all come as batches of four, one for each filter, all taken with
the same exposure at the same time and in the case of observations, looking at the same patch of sky.
The ROSS2 image files are stored with as 1024x1024 images, however the area of the images is less than this
as illustrated in Fig. 1, the upper and rightmost parts of the images are filled with zeros to make up to 1024 rows
or columns. In all processing herein, the images are trimmed to the appropriate size to avoid unnecessary (and in
some cases invalid) computations with rows and columns of zeros.

2.2

Initial analysis of data

The images are processed according to the formula:
(mage−bias)×mf
f lat−bias

In this mf represents to mean value of the flat pixels. The master flat files provided already have the relevant
master bias subtracted.
2.2.1

Some example image displays

In Fig. 6 is illustrated a sample image from one of the observations of Barnard’s Star using the g filter and using
the supplied master bias and flat files. In Fig. 7 is shown a similar observation from March 2020. Note how the
second image is rotated clockwise by 90◦ from the previous image and includes a different set of other objects for
potential reference stars.
In nearly every case there are 4 images taken, one with each of the 4 visible light filters (in addition to the
simultaneous REMIR observations) and in Fig. 6 is illustrated a set of observations of Proxima Centauri taken on
the same date, 17 September 2018, as the observation of Barnard’s Star in Fig. 6. For comparison, in Fig. 9 is
shown a set of observations taken on 9 March 2020.

7

Figure 6: This is an observation of Barnard’s Star taken with the g filter on 17 September 2018 at 02:58:52 UTC
after processing using the master bias and flat files for September 2018. The brightest object, marked A and
marked in green is Barnard’s Star, whilst the next 9 brightest objects are marked in yellow and B, C, etc. in
decreasing order of brightness.

Figure 7: This is an observation of Barnard’s Star taken with the g filter on 7 March 2020 at 09:07:23 UTC after
processing using the master bias and flat files for March 2020. The brightest object, marked A and marked in
green is Barnard’s Star, whilst the next 9 brightest objects are marked in yellow and B, C, etc. in decreasing order
of brightness. It may be noted that some of the objects, at this stage, prior to more detailed analysis of the other
objects, are not marked consistently with those in Fig. 6.

8

Figure 8: This is all 4 observations of Proxima Centauri taken with the visible light filters on 17 September 2018 at
02:12:40 UTC after processing using appropriate master bias and flat files for September 2018. They are arranged
in the order and orientation in which they are taken from the CCD. The divisions on each image are pixel numbers.

Figure 9: This is all 4 observations of Proxima Centauri taken with the visible light filters on 9 March 2020 at
08:56:14 UTC after processing using appropriate master bias and flat files for March 2020. They are arranged in
the order and orientation in which they are taken from the CCD. The divisions on each image are pixel numbers.

9

2.3

Caveats and matters to be addressed in analysing data

The following issues were apparent in the analysis of the data.
1. There is no clear uncertainty measure in the master flat and bias files.
2. The master flat files do not appear to be adequate, with some shading in the images. This is particularly of
concern with the g filter towards the bottom part, although this is towards the centre of the CCD, as shown
in Fig. 1.
3. Some of the pixel values become negative after subtraction of the master bias files.
4. There is a ring-shaped artefact above and slightly to the right of the brightest objects in the images for the z
filter, invariably for the target, but to a greater or lesser degree for the other objects. Often the artefact lands
entirely on another object, compromising the usability of the frame.
As a result, it proved advisable to avoid the z filter as it would not be practical to try to compensate for the
artefacts given the likely poor return if this were done. The target M-dwarf objects are invariably very much
brighter than any of the possible reference objects for this (and also for the i filter) and any extensive effort to
eliminate the artefacts would not appear worthwhile.

3

Work done to date

The following outlines the work done to date.

3.1

Software tools

In order to manage the large number of files, I set up a database using MySQL and a Python library and tool set
to access this conveniently. The database is used to to manage records of each observation, the daily flat and bias
files taken, records of objects in the vicinity of each target with relevant data, where objects were found in the
images and ADU calculation results with uncertainties. Most relevant FITS files are stored in the database but the
toolset created transparently fetches other FITS files as required.
3.1.1

Display and analysis tools

The contrast on the images is poor and I was unable to obtain any useful photometry from standard image analysis
software. I worked mainly with AstroImageJ from which Fig. 10 is derived. The corresponding image from the
software I developed is in Fig. 11.2
It proved that most of the objects found in the GAIA database and other sources and with details copied across,
nearly 60%, had average of less than 1000 ADU counts above the sky level of 50 ± 10 ADU counts. Only 0.5%
of the objects, approximately 9 in total for the best Ross 154 images, slightly more for Proxima Centauri, slightly
less for Barnard’s Star, had ADU counts of 100 times the sky level and of those few frames had all of these due to
differing areas of the sky being covered by different frames.
The only way it appeared possible to proceed was to write my own display and analysis software, from which
the figures shown herein were derived. This finely divides ADU counts into 16 different greyscales (with provision
to increase this to up to 32 greyscales). Pixels are assigned a given greyscale based upon whether they fall within
one of a set of percentiles.

3.2

Master calibration files

In order to address the matters such as those referred to in Section 2.3 above, a study was made of the master bias
and flat files supplied.
The following problems were observed with these files.
1. The number of daily bias or flat files going to make up the master files is not consistent, month by month.
Each master file is made up entirely from the daily files for the calendar month concerned, which may vary
considerably in number and criteria for selection.
2. Some of the criteria for selection of the files, particularly the flat files, are unusual and unexplained.3
3. Some of the statistics for selection of daily files, notably the flat files, are incorrectly calculated and/or
stated.4
2 I also tried AperturePT before it ceased to be usable on the Linux platform I was using, DS9 and the GAIA tool.
3 The selection of the daily flat files is restricted to those for which the skewness is negative and the kurtosis is less than 7.
4 It did not seem a productive use of time to reproduce the programming error and work out the actual but incorrect set of daily flat files
which went to make up the master flat files.

10

Figure 10: This shows the display in AstroImageJ of the observation of Ross 154 at 02:04:10 on 31 October 2021
in the r filter. The three brightest objects together with the target gave been highlighted. However the software
was not able to find the objects on the image for this observation.

Figure 11: This shows the same display as Fig. 10, namely of Ross 154 at 02:04:10 on 31 October 2021 in the r
filter using my toolset with the first 50 brightest objects highlighted out of a total of 274 found. Note that only the
brightest 52 objects on average across all of the images, including Ross 154, which is labelled A, have currently
had apertures optimised, these 52 objects are labelled A to Z and then A1 to Z1, lower case labels show objects
not specifically identified.

11

4. The master bias files, as constructed, include extreme values for some pixels which cause values for the
image files to go negative when the bias file is subtracted. No account is taken of noisy or unreliable pixels.
5. The daily flat files consist of sets of 3 in decreasing light and the median value is taken, the result being
then normalised. This causes the benefit of the brighter flat files, with their better signal to noise ratio, to be
ignored in addition to the other ones.

12

Having considered and tried to use the supplied master bias and flat files, I decided to construct alternative
ones from the daily bias and flat files provided.
A key element in this was to construct the files using a rolling “window” of the same number of daily files
centred on the relevant date. This made a substantial difference to the resulting master files, all of the variations
from month to month were eliminated and the resulting files were very similar.
3.2.1

Defective or unreliable pixels

I undertook a study of all the files, flat files, bias files and observation files to determine whether any pixels in
the CCD array could be counted as “bad” or unresponsive, had particularly high mean values or large standard
deviation. The literature varies somewhat on how bad pixels are defined or determined.
For the purposes of this study, it was clear that the pixels could be described as:
Normal pixels are those which are clearly well-behaved with a linear response within 10% of saturation.
Consistently high pixels are those which whose count never falls below a value significantly higher than bulk of
the pixels. These are often found in whole sections of a column on an array.
Noisy pixels are closest to Dead pixels as defined in Maslennikova et al. (2020). Included are those with consistent high levels of noise, with the standard deviation on the bias level over 5 times the standard deviation.
Bad pixels are ones which give random readings, usually very low ones.
In addition, all of the pixels, to a greater or lesser extent, can give random very high readings which stand out
from the neighbouring pixels. These might perhaps be due to cosmics in some cases, or because on resetting the
CCD those pixels are not reset. Some are random much more often than others and these correspond to the noisy
pixels.
There are very few examples, in the order of 25 pixels spread over the used area of the array, which qualify as
bad.
It is straightforward to interpolate over the relevant pixels. There are a few places where there are strings of
adjacent noisy or consistently high pixels, but these almost entirely affect columns in the CCD, the worst example
can be found in the area used for the g filter, seemingly as the CCD is read out by columns, so adjacent pixels on
the same row have to be used for interpolation.
3.2.2

New master flat and bias files

With appropriate adjustments for the defective pixels as described above, it proved straightforward to construct
new master bias files using a “rolling window” centred on the date required. I constructed standard deviations for
each individual pixel, so each master bias and flat file consists of two planes, one giving values for each pixel and
the second giving the standard deviations. These are combined where appropriate using the rules for combination
of errors.
I made an extensive study of the linearity using the daily flat files; it would appear than the performance is
linear up to 62,000 counts per pixel out of a possible 65,536. I constructed the master flat files using daily files
with pixels between a range of 5,000 and 61,000 to be clear of this linearity cut-off. None of the image files, other
than ones contaminated by cosmics and similar, had pixel values close to 60,000. I did not use the skewness or
kurtosis measurements used in the construction of the original master flat files as this did not seem to have any
benefit5 . I then subtracted from the selected daily flat files the newly-constructed master bias file centred on the
relevant date and normalised the result. I then combined the results into a master flat file for the relevant date using
a weighted geometric mean, the weights being inversely proportional to the standard deviations.
This resulted in a much more satisfactory set of master bias and flat files and it was possible to much more
confident of the uncertainty of values on a per-pixel basis. The combination of the flat files using a weighted
geometric mean, included many more of the brighter files, with their higher SNR, giving them priority over the
darkest files, whilst still obtaining some benefit from the latter.
When the object ADU counts from REM images are computed from the images, the standard deviations for
each individual pixel in the image are combined into an overall standard deviation for the ADU count for the
relevant object.

3.3

Finding and identifying objects

Most of the objects in the neighbourhood of the target M-dwarf objects were identified using GAIA DR3. Where
alternative shorter names than GAIA DR3 nnnnnnn were found, this was used in preference. Bearing in mind the
resolution of the REM telescope of around 0.6 arcsecond, objects closer together than this distance were eliminated,
as were objects with irregular profiles and one marked as variable.
5 Even if they were correctly calculated.

13

The magnitudes in various bands are all noted in the database records, but these were mainly used as a guideline
where there was ambiguity in distinguishing close but not overlapping objects. Aperture sizes were calculated by
fitting a Gaussian to approximate the PSF and taking the mean over the dataset of acceptable images. This works
better with some frames, such as in Fig. 12, then others, such as Fig. 13.

Figure 12: This shows the profile and the fitted Gaussian for the observation of Ross 154 taken on 26 April 2019
at 08:54:03 with the r filter. The right hand image shows the differences between this and the actual flux, positive
values in green and negative in red. Air mass for this was 1.0085.

Figure 13: This shows the profile and the fitted Gaussian for the observation of Ross 154 taken on 16 September
2019 at 03:39:47 with the r filter. The right hand image shows the differences between this and the actual flux,
positive values in green and negative in red. Air mass for this was 1.5665.
There remains considerable work in finalising the optimal aperture sizes for each objects, particularly with
Proxima Centauri and Barnard’s Star. It may be necessary to calculate them individually for each frame, especially
14

for the fainter objects.
The best frames contain up to 200 possible reference stars for the best examples, more for Proxima Centauri
and less for Barnard’s Star. Average frames contain up to 30 or so. Any with less than 30 are rejected as too poor.6

3.4

Calibration of reference stars and ADU counts

As previously noted, not all the frames contain the same reference stars, or have the same orientation, some are
rotated by 90◦ or 180◦ relative to others. The target object may be off-centre by varying amounts and in varying
directions and different reference objects appear in different frames, or are too close to the edge in some cases,
where vignetting or similar reduces the accuracy, to be usable. Only a small handful (single figures) of brighter
objects appear in nearly all the frames and none, other than the target, appear in all of the frames.
After some experimentation with strategies for computing and calibration of the objects, the most promising
strategy emerged as being for each filter.
1. Compute the ADU count and standard deviation for each object in each frame.
2. Compute the mean ADU count and corresponding standard deviation for each object. Clearly strongly
variable objects previously missed can be weeded out at this stage.
3. For each observation, perform a linear regression fit of the calculated ADUs for each object other than the
target in the frame to the mean ADUs.
4. Apply the fit backwards, propagating the standard deviation, to the calculated ADUs for the target on the
frame and compare with the mean ADUs for the target to give the variation from the mean of the target for
that frame.
This technique proved very successful, in most cases the correlation of the linear regression was better than
95%, and proved insensitive to what set of reference stars were available on a particular frame. However, as the
targets are very much brighter, by a factor of 100 or more, than the majority of the reference stars, this linear
regression technique involves a considerable extrapolation to arrive at a calibrated ADU count for the targets.

3.5

Results for Ross 154

The results for Ross 154 are set out in the draft paper attached to this report. but in summary the data sources
referred to in papers which mentioned measurements for Ross 154 were studied and a rotation period of 2.87±0.01
days was confirmed consistently.
After processing the data using the modified bias and flat files and processing the counts relative to the reference stars as described above in Section 3.4, the period of 2.87 days was clearly extracted from the data.
This confirms that there is viability in the methods used in terms of recovering the rotation period for Ross 154.
More challenging may be that for Barnard’s Star, where the number of observations is less and also the number of
reference objects.

3.6

Problems with light curves for Ross 154

There appears to be a problem with many of the observations for Ross 154, in that there are huge swings seem to
be observable in the calibrated flux within the course of a few minutes. This is illustrated in the light curve shown
in the draft paper reproduced in Fig. 14. An example of the wildest set of swings is seen in the September 2019
period, and a particularly wild set of readings was observed on 13 September 2019. The total flux for Ross 154
and the two next brightest objects for that day is shown in Fig. 15
Observable is the huge jump over the course of about 2 minutes between the fifth and sixth point on this figure.
The flux for Ross 154 drops by a quarter in this time.
Display of the images for the fifth and sixth point on this figure is given in Fig. 16 and Fig. 17 respectively.
It may be seen that the sky level has increased by a factor of 3 whilst the maximum flux has reduced by a about a
third. This causes the contrast to be much poorer, with much less detail.
Concerns about the overall swings are alleviated somewhat, when it seen that similar swings are observable in
observations of Ross 154 from other sources, as shown in Fig. 18

6 This figure is subject to amendment, currently the rejection is binary, but there is provision for a “quality” marker enabling frames to be
partially used where appropriate.

15

Figure 14: This shows the total flux after calibration from Ross 154 found in all acceptable images in REM
observations, normalised so that the mean is 1.0. There was a change in configuration in late March 2019, indicated
by the sold vertical green line, but this occurred 595 days from the start and thus does not account for any of the
shape of the plot shown. The dotted vertical lines indicate the start of the years 2018 through to 2022.

Figure 15: This shows the total flux, with no attempt to calibrate, for Ross 154 and the next two brightest objects
visible on 13 September 2019. In this figure A represents Ross 154, whilst F and D represent TIC 224752356 and
Gaia DR3 4075153519816173184 respectively.

16

Figure 16: This shows the image for Ross 154 on 13 Sept 2019 at 02:51:43 with the 6 strongest sources identified
and labelled,

Figure 17: This shows the image for Ross 154 on 13 Sept 2019 at 02:53:51 with the 6 strongest sources identified
and labelled,

17

Figure 18: This figure shows combined data from ASAS, K2, MEarth and REM, specifically for the r filter, as
blue, green, red and black respectively with the intensity in each normalised to a mean of 1, i.e. on the same scale,
and showing the dates on which each was taken. The REM light curve is after calibration by comparison with other
objects in each frame.

18

4

Further work following progression

The following is the programme of work I need to undertake in order to regard the project as complete.
In a lot of cases, the work already done will need revisiting and refining and “iterating until convergence”
achieved.
I see the following as necessary.
1. Better handle bad or unreliable pixels identifying ones prone to “spikes” and bouts of insensitivity and
improving the interpolation over them. Where they land on an object, it would be better to interpolate using
any fitted Gaussian profile.
2. Optimise as many as possible of the reference object apertures and identify irregularly shaped and variable
objects.
3. Look at other filters, such as the g filter, possibly the other filters, although the number of available reference
objects looks poor and the z filter images all have artefacts in them.
4. Repeat the work done for Ross 154 with Proxima Centauri and Barnard’s Star and consider periodograms
for them. In particular, obtain a rotation period for Barnard’s Star, for which there are a variety of values in
the literature.
5. Extend the work done to date to the REMIR near infrared images.
I intend to spend the period until the end of the calendar year focusing on steps 1 and 2, before moving on
to 3, to complete the analysis of Ross 154 and making the techniques more automatic, particularly in the area of
fitting of reference objects and optimising the apertures, which relies currently on too much manual intervention
to be viable.
The year to the end of 2023 should see the balance of the project completed ready for write-up and submission
by April 2024.

References
[1] Aizawa, M., Kawana, K., Kashiyama, K., et al. 2022, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2206.12847
[2] Antonelli, L. A. 2005, in American Institute of Physics Conference Series, Vol. 797, Interacting Binaries:
Accretion, Evolution, and Outcomes, ed. L. Burderi, L. A. Antonelli, F. D’Antona, T. di Salvo, G. L. Israel,
L. Piersanti, A. Tornambè, & O. Straniero, 173–180
[3] Benedict, G. F., McArthur, B., Nelan, E., et al. 1998, AJ, 116, 429
[4] Calzoletti, L., Melandri, A., Testa, V., et al. 2005, Nuovo Cimento C Geophysics Space Physics C, 28, 759
[5] Collins, J. M., Jones, H. R. A., & Barnes, J. R. 2017, A&A, 602, A48
[6] di Paola, A. 2001, in Gamma-ray Bursts in the Afterglow Era, ed. E. Costa, F. Frontera, & J. Hjorth, 390
[7] Giannini, T., Vitali, F., Lorenzetti, D., Antoniucci, S., & Licchelli, D. 2018, The Astronomer’s Telegram,
11811, 1
[8] Magaudda, E., Stelzer, B., & Raetz, S. 2022, Astronomische Nachrichten, 343, easna.20220049
[9] Maslennikova, N. A., Shatsky, N. I., & Tatarnikov, A. M. 2020, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2012.12915
[10] Mohanty, S., & Basri, G. 2003, ApJ, 583, 451
[11] Suárez Mascareño, A., Rebolo, R., González Hernández, J. I., & Esposito, M. 2015, MNRAS, 452, 2745
[12] The Red Dots Project. 2020, Red Dots - A search for terrestrial planets around the nearest red dwarfs,
https://reddots.space/, Online; accessed 24 March 2020
[13] Toledo-Padrón, B., González Hernández, J. I., Rodrı́guez-López, C., et al. 2018, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1812.06712
[14] Vida, K., Oláh, K., Kővári, Z., van Driel-Gesztelyi, L., & Moór, A. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1907.12580
[15] Wargelin, B. J., Kashyap, V. L., Drake, J. J., Garcı́a-Alvarez, D., & Ratzlaff, P. W. 2008, ApJ, 676, 610

19

